PAGE 1
Workshop On Deep Learning - Climate Video
Shahar Mendel and Yarden Reich
Contributing authors: shaharmendel@mail.tau.ac.il;
yardenreich@mail.tau.ac.il;
Abstract
Climate change is an important topic that affects all of us, but many of the ways
experts interact with the public are frequently based on raw scientific data, which
could fail to effectively communicate to the general public the critical nature
and importance of climate change. The objective was to train an AI system that
would be able to produce a video post that would raise awareness about climate
change in a more interactive and engaging way.
1 Introduction
Several AI systems have the capability to produce videos, a task that requires gen-
erating multiple frames with semantic correlation. Among these models, there are
GAN models with 2D convolution that use RNN to create the connection between the
images [1], or more complex models that use diffusion with 3D convolution [2] or 3D
VQ-GAN [3].
In our project, we present a generative model designed for crafting short videos
related to climate change, specifically focusing on forest fires. This model generates
video clips by sequentially producing video frames using 2D VQGAN [4]. At each
time step, the VQGAN maps a latent vector to an image. These latent vectors are
constructed through multiple methods.
The first method involves encoding two images into a latent space and generating
frames for a video by interpolating between the latent representations of these images.
The speed of the interpolation is influenced by real-world climate change data, making
the generated content represent in a way real-world climate change data.
The second approach entails using latent vectors from images with the desired
attribute and images lacking this attribute. These latent vectors enable us to add the
desired attribute to the generated image.
1

PAGE 2
The final method involves CLIP guiding, where we optimize the latent vector of a
given image to align with the CLIP embedding of a specified text. This process allows
us to generate new latent vectors of our choosing.
2 Related work
2.1 Variational Auto-Encoder
In this project, we used a version of a Variational Auto-Encoder [5]. The VAE is a
generative model that effectively learns a latent representation of data, and later on
uses this representation to generate new data samples. One version of the Variational
Auto-Encoder is VQ-VAE [6, 7] which uses discrete vectors for the representation of
the latent space. The encoder remains responsible for generating a representation of
the input images within the discrete latent space and the decoder does the reverse. A
Codebook is created to keep the discrete vectors that were learned. The encoder maps
data to a vector in latent space and quantizes it based on the distance to prototype
vectors in the codebook.
2.2 Generative Adversarial Networks
There are a lot of ML models that fall under the GAN [8–10] umbrella, but what
they all have in common is some generative network (Generator) and some kind of
classification network (Discriminator) that is trying to tell the difference between the
output of the generative network and real-world data. these networks use some kind
of version of adversarial loss[7].
3 Methodology
3.1 Dataset and Data Collection
We decided to train our model on a dataset containing a mix of pictures of healthy
forests, burning forests, and general landscapes with the intention of obtaining a latent
space that is capable of representing both types of pictures.
finding a good quality pre-built dataset proved to be difficult, so we created our
own dataset by pruning existing datasets[11, 12] and scraping Google images using
custom software we wrote
3.2 Model
In this project, our primary goal was to create a seamless transition between the
images. In order to achieve this, we needed to find a way to represent these images as
a latent vector. To accomplish this task, we chose a model with an autoencoder, more
specifically we chose to use VQGAN.
2

PAGE 3
VQGAN works by using the VQVAE autoencoder and training it on the VQVAE
loss for a number of steps after the number of steps is complete the real and recon-
structed images are also fed through a discriminator, and the GAN loss is added to
the loss of the autoencoder, which plays the role of the generator in the GAN.
VQ-VAE loss:
LQV =∥ x − ˆx ∥2 + ∥ sg[E(x)] − zq ∥2
2 + ∥ sg[zq] − E(x) ∥2
2
GAN hinge loss[13]:
LGAN = E(x)∼pdata[max(0, 1 − D(x))] + E(x)∼pdata[max(0, 1 + D(G(x)))]
LG = −E(x)∼pdata[D(G(x))]
The reconstruction loss is computed by using a pre-trained VGG16 model. Both real
images and the respective reconstructed images are fed through the VGG model. At
various stages of the model’s convolution layers, their outputs are fed through a fully
connected layer. The reconstruction loss is then calculated by summing the difference
between the values of the real and reconstructed images.
Fig. 1 : Reconstruction of images
4 Video generation using interpolation
The first method of video generation is interpolation. the video is created using two
existing images, and images created using the convex combination of the latent vectors
of the two original images.
3

PAGE 4
Original
 Reconstruction
Fig. 2 : Images and their reconstruction
Fig. 3 : Interpolation between the images
Interpolations allow the user to set the final photo of the video, allowing a real-world
comparison between two temporally differentiated pictures of the same subject (i.e.
generating a transition between before and after pictures of a burnt forest)
5 Attribute manipulation
attribute manipulation of Variational Autoencoders (VAE) as described in [5], refers to
the process of modifying specific attributes within input data. A VAE is able to learn a
latent representation of the data through its encoder. Using this, the encoder can help
find a latent representation of a particular attribute. This is done by computing the
latent vectors mean of images without the attribute and subtracting it from the latent
vectors mean of images with the attribute. By applying this attribute latent vector
either through addition or subtraction we can control the attribute in the image. After
modifying the latent representation, the decoder generates the modified data point.
Using this process, we create new images for the video:
4

PAGE 5
Fig. 4 : Changes in the image by adding the attribute latent vector
6 Video generation using CLIP
CLIP [14] (Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training) is a model that compares text
to images and assigns each input pair of text and image a similarity score. CLIP is
trained using contrastive loss, this loss is Cosine similarity between the 2 latent vectors
corresponding to the text and image inputs.
We used CLIP as a way to create the loss between specific prompts [15] (like
”billowing smoke”, ”tree on fire”) and the output of the model to run gradient descent
on the embedding of an existing photo, training the latent vector of an existing image
to fit the prompt better.
for example, a photo before training, and a photo after training as shown in 5.
A video is generated using the steps between the original image and the final image,
such that each video frame is picked using real-world data, meaning the warmer the
climate is, the closer the frame will be to the final trained image.
Fig. 5 : The images created using our VQGAN and CLIP
Once the input image is passed through the encoder, the resulting image latent vec-
tors are entered as the optimizer’s parameters. Afterward, these latent vectors are fed
through the decoder. The loss is computed on augmented random cuts of the recon-
structed image, with respect to the prompt. This is done to ensure the stability and
robustness of the loss calculation.
5

PAGE 6
Fig. 6 : Representation of how CLIP connects to the VQGAN. The gradient is calcu-
lated between the input/output marked in blue.
more examples:
Fig. 7 : Different images created using our VQGAN and CLIP
7 Limitations and Future ways to Improve
7.1 Limitations
One of the limitations is that our VQ-GAN doesn’t create perfect images, there are
some artifacts that we couldn’t train out of the model. In addition, some images won’t
reconstruct as well as we expected. This cause the clip images to not be perfect, and
the parameters need to be adjusted to get good images.
The other limitation is computation power, the creation of multiple images takes
time and resources, which means the resolution of the clip cutouts number needs to
be decreased.
6

PAGE 7
7.2 Future ways to Improve
Enhancing the image quality generated by VQGAN and additional fine-tuning to the
model is a potential way to improve. Additionally, there are more sophisticated ways
of generating a video using generative models that could be used instead of VQGAN
and Clip.
One alternative way of generating a video is using a diffusion model as described
in [2]. In this method, a diffusion model is trained to generate multiple images of the
video. These images are then inserted as the input frames for another model, allowing
for the creation of longer videos than 16 frames. However, this method produces videos
with lower resolutions.
Another method entails training a 3D-VQGAN model and using a transformer to
generate a sequence of images forming the video, as discussed in [16] and [3]. This
approach involves substituting 3D convolution for the standard 2D convolution in
the VQGAN and employing attention residual blocks instead of conventional residual
blocks.
Furthermore, there is the possibility of combining these two approaches by employ-
ing the diffusion model to generate a sequence of images within the latent space of the
VQGAN. Afterward, these latent space images can be decoded to produce the final
video, as shown in the paper [17].
References
[1] Tulyakov, S., Liu, M.-Y., Yang, X., Kautz, J.: MoCoGAN: Decomposing Motion
and Content for Video Generation (2017)
[2] Ho, J., Salimans, T., Gritsenko, A., Chan, W., Norouzi, M., Fleet, D.J.: Video
Diffusion Models (2022)
[3] Yan, W., Zhang, Y., Abbeel, P., Srinivas, A.: VideoGPT: Video Generation using
VQ-VAE and Transformers (2021)
[4] Esser, P., Rombach, R., Ommer, B.: Taming transformers for high-resolution
image synthesis. CoRR abs/2012.09841 (2020) 2012.09841
[5] Kingma, D.P., Welling, M.: Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes (2022). https://
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114
[6] Oord, A., Vinyals, O., Kavukcuoglu, K.: Neural discrete representation learning.
CoRR abs/1711.00937 (2017) 1711.00937
[7] Razavi, A., Oord, A., Vinyals, O.: Generating diverse high-fidelity images with
VQ-VAE-2. CoRR abs/1906.00446 (2019) 1906.00446
7

PAGE 8
[8] Goodfellow, I.J., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair,
S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y.: Generative Adversarial Networks (2014)
[9] Radford, A., Metz, L., Chintala, S.: Unsupervised Representation Learning with
Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks (2016)
[10] Karras, T., Laine, S., Aila, T.: A Style-Based Generator Architecture for
Generative Adversarial Networks (2019)
[11] Rougetet, A.: Landscape pictures (2020). https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
arnaud58/landscape-pictures
[12] ALIK05: Forest fire dataset (2022). https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/alik05/
forest-fire-dataset
[13] Lim, J.H., Ye, J.C.: Geometric GAN (2017). https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02894v2
[14] Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., Krueger, G., Sutskever, I.: Learning Transferable
Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision (2021). https://arxiv.org/
abs/2103.00020
[15] Crowson, K., Biderman, S., Kornis, D., Stander, D., Hallahan, E., Castricato,
L., Raff, E.: VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation and Editing with
Natural Language Guidance (2022). https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.08583
[16] Ge, S., Hayes, T., Yang, H., Yin, X., Pang, G., Jacobs, D., Huang, J.-B., Parikh,
D.: Long Video Generation with Time-Agnostic VQGAN and Time-Sensitive
Transformer (2022)
[17] Blattmann, A., Rombach, R., Ling, H., Dockhorn, T., Kim, S.W., Fidler, S., Kreis,
K.: Align your Latents: High-Resolution Video Synthesis with Latent Diffusion
Models (2023)
[18] Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P.: Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (2020)
Appendix A Testing Other Models
During our path to discovering VQGAN, we explored several alternative models
capable of producing a sequence of images for video creation purposes.
One of these models was StyleGAN [10], in which we experimented with adjusting
the style amount to generate images. However, when we attempted this approach, the
outcome was low-quality images that had little resemblance to the original image.
Subsequently, we made an attempt at generating images with a diffusion model
[18]. We used the number of steps within the UNET architecture for video generation.
Unfortunately, the resulting video did not meet our expectations, and our training
was restricted to low-resolution images.
8